Say Goodbye to Knee Pain
Knee pain is one of the growing problems commonly found in every household.
In the United States of America, a considerable 15 to 20 percent of men complain of knee pain.
While both the youth and the aged alike share this common problem, knee pain is known to increase and deteriorate with age. 
Causes of Knee Pain
Some causes of knee pain are broadly classified under 
1.	Knee arthritis
2.	Knee ligament injuries
3.	Knee cartilage injuries
4.	Tendonitis
5.	Dislocated knee cap
6.	Baker’s cyst
7.	Knee joint infection
8.	Knee cap fracture
9.	A bone tumor
The first four reasons are common causes while the remaining five, along with many others are not so common.
Arthritis- A Major Cause
Arthritis can be broadly defined as any inflammation or pain in any of the joints in the body.
There are over a hundred types of arthritis.
Some common types are
1.	 Osteoarthritis- It results from the breakdown of joint cartilage and underlying bone.
The patient most commonly suffers from excessive joint pain and stiffness. 
2.	Rheumatoid arthritis- It is caused by the body's own immune system.
Maximum damage occurs to the joint lining and cartilage.
The erosion of bones occurs in rheumatoid arthritis.
It may cause severe deformation.
3.	Lupus- Lupus is usually accompanied by arthritis, photosensitivity (allergic to sunlight), skin rashes, hair loss, lung fibrosis, and kidney malfunction.
4.	Gout- It is caused by the deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint, resulting in inflammation.
Treatments
When the pain persists for a long time and there is swelling, redness, inability to walk, accompanied by stiffness, one must immediately take up the following knee pain treatment methods.
1.	Home remedies- A doctor may suggest one immobilize the affected area to the extent of complete rest of the knee, apply an ice pack and give support, if necessary.
These home remedies can work wonderfully in the preliminary stages.
These simple ways can prevent fatal deformities.
2.	Physiotherapy- Physical exercise is employed to rid the pain in physiotherapy or physical therapy. 
3.	Oriental solutions- Acupuncture and tai chi help in treating knee pain, especially knee osteoarthritis.
Another organic solution is salt treatment which has gained popularity in curing recurring lung problems like asthma and joint pain.
4.	Medication- Certain injections and anti-inflammatory drugs can help in reducing the pain. 
5.	Surgery- The various types of surgical procedures are knee replacement surgery, arthroscopic surgery and rheumasurgery.
A surgery has to be performed only when the knee pain is severe, which could be because of arthritis, fracture or dislocation.
Such a surgery involves the replacement of the knee cap.
Surgery- A Major Boon
The knee replacement surgery may seem to be an attractive knee pain treatment method.
Most patients who had undergone this surgery find better mobility of the joint, reduced stiffness, and complete elimination of pain.
One may, however, have to take the risk of several complications that may arise during the knee replacement procedure to achieve such life-changing benefits.
The proverb “Prevention before cure” goes without saying.
Anyone with the aforementioned symptoms must take to exercise and other prevention methods and home remedies.
Although surgeries have immense benefits, one must always try to adopt a healthy lifestyle as far as possible. 
