https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Cancer_Day
The World Health Organization (WHO), under the United Nations (UN) have declared February 4 as World Cancer Day, to raise awareness of cancer.
It is observed to rally against the social stigma involved and prevent deaths caused by cancer by encouraging the detection, prevention, and treatment of cancer.
This was initiated by the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) in 2011 to support the goals of the World Cancer Declaration.
The tagline for the World Cancer Day from the year 2019-21 would be “I am and I will.”
Cancer has snatched the lives of innumerable innocent souls.
It is reported that over 15% of the total deaths all over the globe are caused by cancer.
People of all age groups are at a risk and the risk increases exponentially over the years.
Causes of Cancer
The known causes of cancer can be categorized as
1.	Internal factors- Genetic inheritance, hormonal imbalance, and the presence of autoimmune diseases and other infections are some internal causes of rapid cell growth which ultimately leads to cancer.
These are indirectly dependent on environmental factors and lifestyle.
2.	External factors and lifestyle- Certain environmental factors like pollution by the presence of carcinogenic substances and radiation ease the rapid growth of cancer cells.
Bad lifestyle habits like consumption of tobacco causes oral cancer; smoking causes lung and oral cancer; frequent sexual intercourse with different partners makes a male fall at a risk of prostate cancer while a female falls at a risk of cervical, breast and ovarian cancer; consumption of intoxicants, diet, and exercise also affect cancer cells and their growth.
Symptoms of Cancer
Initially, there are no observable symptoms.
Symptoms are observed only when there is a rapid growth of cancer cells.
Common symptoms include a lump, abnormal bleeding, prolonged cough, weight loss and a variation in bowel movements.
In addition to these, there are specific symptoms of different types of cancer.
Treatment
Depending on the degree and type of cancer, there are different approaches to curing a cancer patient. 
Chemotherapy or chemical therapy employs certain chemicals that target rapidly growing cancerous cells.
Although it is an effective process, side effects are adverse.
Hair loss is one side effect. 
Hormone therapy is employed to cure prostate and breast cancer.
The medicines increase the ability of organs to secrete the respective hormones, which play a significant role in curing these types of cancer. 
Immunotherapy boosts the natural fighting mechanism of the body and encourages the body to fight against the cancer cells. 
Radiation therapy uses a high dose of radiation which aims at dwindling and gradually killing the cancer cells. 
Stem cell transplant helps in curing blood cancers like leukemia. 
Tumors can be surgically removed.
Since cancer is a deadly and excruciating condition, some relieving techniques like interventional pain management can help the patient deal with the physical pain.
Prevention
Since most of the reasons are based on external factors and poor living habits, cancer can be prevented by raising awareness among the general public.
Food habits can be changed to an optimum amount of salt, gluten-free diet, avoiding the consumption of intoxicants, etc.
A regulated sex life is also important. Obesity must be cut down.
Keeping in mind the causes of cancer, one can keep track of one’s actions that could help prevent cancer to a large extent.
When one is diagnosed with advanced stages of cancer, one can take to interventional pain management, which is offered by all cancer care units, to deal with physical pain and by divine intervention, and support, one can heal mentally.
