Sports Medicine and Its Advantages By Dr. Taylor Alesia
With increasing deaths caused by heart attacks, strokes, and other related avoidable health failures, it is important to change our lifestyle.
In addition to heart diseases, there is a growing number of mentally affected people.
Food habits, obesity and a lack of sufficient exercise play a major role in aggravating the aforementioned problems.
This has led governments to encourage sports among the population of all age groups.
Huge funds are being invested for training and representing sports professionals on international platforms.
And to support the sports professionals, there is an entire branch of health care dedicated to them, known as sports medicine.
What is sports medicine? Why sports medicine?
Sports medicine is a branch of medical science that deals with the various aspects of the health of sportspersons.
Some common departments under this branch are the treatment of injuries, prevention of injuries, nutrition, and sports psychiatry and psychology.
A separate pediatric specialization for each of the departments is also present. 
A common layman question would be why should an athlete consult a sports medico over any general physician?
This is because a sports medicine doctor, or a sports medicine specialist, to be specific, studies the cause, effects, and prevention of relevant health issues caused during sports activities.
A full-fledged treatment also includes prevention from recurring injuries.
Injuries and their prevention
A sportsperson can commonly injure the head, neck, shoulders, wrists, fingers, back, knee or ankle.
They can be of various intensities ranging from a mere strain in the muscle or a superficial cut to severe fractures.
Trauma in the head and neck occurrences can even cause death.
For many recurring problems in the shoulder and knees, especially when conservative and non-surgical therapy fails, a good doctor would appropriately suggest going for a surgery.
Certain exercises and immobilization of the injured area are also recovery and precautionary methods for common wear and tear.
Nutrition for athletes
One of the most important aspects in the life of a sportsperson is nutrition.
Wholesome foodstuffs not only nourish one but can also prevent some fatalities like hemorrhages.
Besides, a perfect metabolism plays a key role in the performance of players.
Some essential nutrients to be included in their diet are minerals (like calcium, iron, manganese), proteins and roughage.
It is also very important to stay hydrated at all times as it can prevent spasms.
A nutrition specialist in sports can guide an aspiring as well as professionals.
Sports psychiatry and psychology
It is well known that a healthy mind implies a healthy body and that one can conquer anything with intelligence.
Hence, psychiatrists and psychologists play an important role in the performance of a sports player.
Sports psychologists can enhance the performance of sportspersons and teams exponentially.
Various mental strategies like visualization, self-talk and relaxation techniques help athletes overcome obstacles and achieve their full potential.
They also play a crucial role in coping with the pressures of competition, so that players do not succumb to mental perturbations.
Sports psychiatrists focus on diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric illness in players. They have more of a medical approach, involving medicines.
Sports psychiatrists and psychologists work hand in hand, cooperating with each other to boost up performances exponentially.
Sports enthusiasts around the world can now visit a sports medicine specialist in nutrition, psychiatry, psychology in addition to a general sports medicine doctor, to avail the facilities of leading a healthy life.
We can thus conclude that there is a large scope for both sports professionals as well as sports medicine professionals as career options.
