www.dallasmeds.org
Dallas is the home to seven major sports teams in basketball, football, baseball, and soccer, like the Dallas Cowboys, Dallas Mavericks and Texas Rangers.
This city has a large youth population extremely interested in sports.
Thus, it is natural that these sports enthusiasts would require special attention when it comes to health.
So, we have an entire branch of health care dedicated to them, known as sports medicine to encourage youngsters to take to physical activity.
What is sports medicine?
Sports medicine is a branch of medical science that deals with the various aspects of the health of sportspersons.
Some departments under this branch are the treatment of injuries, prevention of injuries, nutrition, and sports psychiatry and psychology.
A separate pediatric specialization for each of the departments is also present.
A specialization in this field is offered in various medical colleges.
A common layman question would be why consult a sports medico over any general physician?
The answer lies in the holistic study of the cause, effects and prevention of relevant health perturbation caused by sports.
Treatments include prevention from recurring injuries.
Injuries
A sportsperson can commonly injure the head, neck, shoulders, wrists, fingers, back, knee or ankle.
They can be of various intensities ranging from a mere strain in the muscle to severe fractures.
Trauma in the head and neck occurrences can even cause death.
Surgery may be an ideal treatment for many recurring problems in the shoulder and knees, especially when conservative and non-surgical therapy fails.
In fact, it is popular amongst the members of the beloved Dallas Cowboys football team.
Several of the best orthopedic doctors in Dallas specialize in surgery related to injuries incurred during matches.
One can consult specialists by searching for keywords like “knee replacement Dallas”, “best sports surgeon”, “shoulder surgeon Dallas” and so on.
Nutrition
One of the most important aspects in the life of a sportsperson is nutrition.
Wholesome foodstuffs not only nourish one but can also prevent some fatalities like hemorrhages.
Besides, a perfect metabolism plays a key role in the performance of players.
Some essential nutrients to be included in their diet are minerals (like calcium, iron, manganese), proteins and roughage.
It is also very important to stay hydrated at all times as it can prevent spasms.
Dallas homes various nutritionists, many of whom are specialized in sports nutrition.
Sports Psychiatry and Psychology
It is well known that a healthy mind implies a healthy body and that one can conquer anything with intelligence.
Hence, psychiatrists and psychologists play an important role in the performance of a sports player.
Sports psychologists can enhance the performance of sportspersons and teams exponentially.
Various mental strategies like visualization, self-talk and relaxation techniques help athletes overcome obstacles and achieve their full potential.
They also play a crucial role in coping with the pressures of competition, so that players do not succumb to mental perturbations.
Sports psychiatrists focus on diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric illness in players.
They have more of a medical approach, involving medicines.
Sports psychiatrists and psychologists work hand in hand, cooperating with each other to boost up performances.
Dallas, being a beta city, has all facilities for healthy living, and sports medicine is no exception.
Furthermore, Dallas is one of the sports hubs of the United States of America and most sports medicos reside here.
One can approach a specialist in any of the above sub-fields of sports medicine in Dallas by the click of a mouse. 