Heart Disease Prediction System Using Data Mining Technique by Fuzzy K-NN Approach

Abstract. Data mining technique in the history of medical data found with
enormous investigations resulted that the prediction of heart disease is very
important in medical science. The data from medical history has been found as
heterogeneous data and it seems that the various forms of data should be
interpreted to predict the heart disease of a patient. Various techniques in Data
Mining have been applied to predict the patients of heart disease. But, the
uncertainty in data was not removed with the techniques available in data
mining. To remove uncertainty, it has been made an attempt by introducing
fuzziness in the measured data. A membership function was designed and
incorporated with the measured value to remove uncertainty. Further, an
attempt was made to classify the patients based on the attributes collected from
medical field. Minimum distance K-NN classifier was incorporated to classify
the data among various groups. It was found that Fuzzy K-NN classifier suits
well as compared with other classifiers of parametric techniques.
Keywords: Fuzzy K-NN Classifier, Membership function, Cleveland Heart
Disease Data Base, Statlog Heart Disease Database,Data Mining,Heart disease.
Introduction
The diagnosis of diseases is a vital and intricate job in medicine. The recognition of
heart disease from diverse features or signs is a multi-layered problem that is not free
from false assumptions and is frequently accompanied by impulsive effects. The
health care industry collects huge amount of health care data which unfortunately are
"not mined" to discover hidden info for effective decision making.
Number test should be performed to diagnosis the heart disease and it forms
various investigations with the data available and it is varied from patient to patient
for health care organisations, data mining techniques are applied to predict the Heart
Disease and useful in preparing knowledge base for further treatment.
It was found that more than one in three adults are found diseased because of heart
problems as per the reports of the World Health Organisation (W.H.O.). It was found that Heart diseases are compared in most of the developed countries are found more
than that of the third world countries (under developing countries). These disorders of
the system are termed cardiovascular diseases. Cardiovascular diseases cause an
estimated 17 million people worldwide each year, majority of these are due to heart
attacks and strokes. The term Cardio Vascular Diseases (CVD) refer to diseases of the
heart and blood vessels and includes conditions such as coronary heart disease which
is also known as ischaemic (heart disease), Cerebrovascular disease (stroke), heart
failure, Rheumatic heart disease and hypertension (high blood pressure). In India,
about 25% of deaths at the age group of 25 - 69 years occur because of heart disease.
In urban areas, 32.8% deaths occur because of heart ailments, while this percentage in
rural areas is about 22.9%.
Most of the authors in data mining classifications techniques proposed for the
prediction of heart disease, but the prediction system did not considered the
uncertainty in the data measure. So, to remove the ambiguity and uncertainty, we
made an experiment with fuzzy approach by introducing a membership function to
the classifier. The fuzzy K-NN classifier results show promising in nature for
removing the redundancy of data and to improve the accuracy of classifier as
compared with other classifiers of supervised and un-supervised learning methods in
data mining.
The term, Heart disease encompasses the diverse diseases that affect the heart.
Heart disease is the major cause of casualties in the United States, England, Canada
and Wales as in 2007. Heart disease kills one person every 34 seconds in the United
States [13].Coronary heart disease; Cardiomyopathy and Cardiovascular diseases are
some categories of heart diseases. The term, “cardiovascular disease” includes a wide
range of conditions that affect the heart and the blood vessels and the manner in
which blood is pumped and circulated through the body. Cardio Vascular Disease
(CVD) results in severe illness, disability and death [14]. Narrowing of the coronary
arteries results in the reduction of blood and oxygen supply to the heart and leads to
the Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). Myocardial infarctions, generally known as a
heart attack and angina pectoris or chest pain are encompassed in the CHD. A sudden
blockage of a coronary artery, generally, due to a blood clot that results a heart attack.
The chest pains arise when the receiving of the blood by the heart muscles is
inadequate [15].
High blood pressure, coronary artery disease, valvular heart disease, stroke or
rheumatic fever/rheumatic, heart diseases are the various forms of cardiovascular
disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that 12 million of
deaths occurred worldwide every year due to the cardiovascular diseases. Half of the
deaths in the United States and other developed countries occur due to cardio vascular
diseases. It is also the chief reason of the deaths in numerous developing countries.
On the whole, it is regarded the primary reason behind the deaths in adults [16].